Support Vector Machines (SVMs) are a machine learning method widely
employed in, e.g., visual recognition, medical diagnosis and robotic
control. One of their most interesting characteristics is that the
solution achieved is sparse: a few samples (support vectors) usually
account for the complexity of the classification task. Both the
training and testing time crucially depend on the number of support
vectors, and it is then very important to keep their number small,
trying at the same time to retain the accuracy of the solution. This
is especially evident in online settings such as topological mapping
for a robotic platform, where a large amount of unknown data is
expected to be available as the robot adapts to the changing
environment.

In this paper we introduce a novel approach to the problem, called
Online Independent SVMs, in which the solution is built online using
only those support vectors which are linearly indepedent in the
feature space. We then show that OISVMs achieve an excellent accuracy
vs.~compactness trade-off in general, while retaining the full
accuracy of ordinary SVMs in case a finite-dimensional kernel is
used. This statement is supported by experiments on standard benchmark
databases as well as on a real-world application, namely place
recognition in an indoor environment, from sequences acquired by robot
platforms under different weather conditions and across a time span of
several months.
