In the framework of advanced, active hand prosthetics, nowadays we are
witnessing a sort of technology transfer from robotics and
mechatronics. Touch Bionics's i-LIMB \cite{ilimb} prosthetic hand,
with its five degrees-of-freedom, is a real breakthrough with respect
to the previous state-of-the-art, Otto Bock's SensorHand Speed
\cite{sensorhand}, which is essentially an open-close
mechanism. Dexterity of hand prostheses is still far from that of
state-of-the-art non-prosthetic mechanical hands, such as, e.g., the
DLR II \cite{Hua2006}, but things are getting better thanks to the
aforementioned inter-disciplinary exchange (see Figure
\ref{fig:hands}). Several EU-funded projects (e.g., CyberHand
\cite{CyberHand} and SmartHand \cite{smarthand}) testify the
enthusiasm in the field.

\begin{figure}
  \begin{tabular}{ccc}
    \includegraphics[width=0.14\textwidth]{figs/hands_TB.jpg} &
    \includegraphics[width=0.14\textwidth]{figs/hands_DLRII.jpg} &
    \includegraphics[width=0.14\textwidth]{figs/hands_OB.jpg} \\
    $(a)$ & $(b)$ & $(c)$
  \end{tabular}
  \caption{$(a)$ Touch Bionics's i-LIMB prosthetic hand (reproduced
    from \cite{ilimb}; $(b)$ the DLR-II mechanical hand; $(c)$ Otto
    Bock's SensorHand Speed (reproduced from \cite{sensorhand}).}
  \label{fig:hands}
\end{figure}

The most used technique for interfacing the patient with the
prosthesis is surface electromyography (EMG). It works by detecting
the activation potentials of the patient's stump residual muscles, and
it is widely employed in the commercial setting; it is relatively
cheap and totally non-invasive. But the control schema employed so far
is rather poor, using two or three electrodes to issue an
``open/close'' command or, in the more advanced case of the i-LIMB, to
choose among a predefined set of grasp shapes. The electrodes are
associated with large muscles in the patient's stump, such as, e.g.,
the wrist flexor and extensor. The result is a highly non-natural for
of control (for isntance, wrist flexion corresponding to opening) and
there is no chance of controlling the desired force.

All in all, a general sense of frustration impends, as far as control
is concerned. How is an amputee supposed to \emph{naturally} command
the prosthesis what to do (i.e., how to grasp an object) and with what
force? Recent research to this end has shown that excellent results
can be obtained by using \emph{machine learning} techniques such as,
e.g., Support Vector Machines (SVM), to let the prosthesis itself
\emph{adapt to the patient}, rather than the other way round. The idea
is that, as it has been shown in, e.g.,
\cite{smagt,dunlop,2008.ICRA,2008.BioCyb,Sebelius2005}, such a system
can be trained to recognize EMG patterns of the patient's stump
muscles, which are then mapped to hand positions and/or a force
exerted by the prosthesis. This way the mechanical hand can be driven
with a degree of finesse unknown so far; and as well, its force can be
controlled, which is possibly even more important.

--------> e ora, model adaptation!
