In \cite{clea07}, we already showed that SVMs clearly outperform a
simple decision tree in solving the problem; so we will be using SVMs
alone in this paper. Morover, it was therein noted that the standard
measure of performance for a SVM classifier (that is, the fraction of
correctly guessed labels over the total number of samples) is biased,
at least in two ways: firstly, the number of $1$ labels is much
smaller than that of $-1$ labels; as a consequence, a dumb predictor
which guessed $-1$ identically would achieve an average accuracy of
about $83\%$. Therefore we adopt a weigthed measure of accuracy,
$\frac{n_{-1} c_1 + n_1 c_{-1}}{c_1+c_{-1}}$, where $n_i$ is the
number of correctly guessed $i$ labels, $i \in \{1,-1\}$, and $c_i$ is
the total number of $i$ labels.

Secondly, we are looking for both accurate \emph{and small} models;
this means that looking for the most accurate models could lead to
unnecessarily large models. Therefore, we adopt here an index of
performance given by the ratio of the weighted accuracy detailed above
and the percentage of support vectors in the obtained model. This
index was used for grid searching the best values of $C$ and $\sigma$.

Figure \ref{fig:comparison} shows the weighted accuracy and size of
the obtained models as $T_c$ is increased, both when using and not
using the gaze.

\begin{figure}[!ht]
  \centering
    \includegraphics[width=\linewidth]{figs/comparison.eps}
    \caption{Comparison between not using the gaze (red curve) and
    using the gaze (black one) as $T_c$ increases. Top panel: weighted
    accuracy. Bottom panel: size of the models, expressed as the
    fraction of Support Vectors. Dots are the mean values over all
    subjects, whereas the errorbars denote $\pm$ one standard deviation.}
    \label{fig:comparison}
\end{figure}

First of all, the effect predicted in the previous Section is present:
both the accuracy and size of the models become better as $T_c$ is
increased, and reach a maximum around $T_c=2$ seconds; then they
remain essentially constant. Secondly, notice that the use of the gaze
uniformly and consistently improves both the accuracy of the models
and their size, the black curve being systematically higher than the
red one, as far as the accuracy is concerned, and lower in the case of
the model size. For $T_c\geq 2$, there is little overlap among the
errorbars, indicating a stastically significant improvement. Thirdly,
it seems that such a value of $T_c$ is just about right for all
subjects, notwithstanding their differences; we then conclude that
$\tau(i)$ is essentially the same for all subjects. This could
dramatically reduce the setup time in a real setting.

For $T_c=2$ seconds, the accuracy is $96.79\% \pm 1.7\%$ using the
gaze, as opposed to $93.69\% \pm 3.24\%$ when not using it; the model
size is $5.27\% \pm 2.12\%$ as opposed to $8.88\% \pm 2.73\%$. The
mean values are better, and the standard deviations are smaller when
using the gaze, denoting better performance and higher robustness with
respect to the diversity of the subjects.

Let us then turn to the experiment with the gaze, and analyse the
performance in deeper detail for the single subjects. Figure
\ref{fig:subjects} shows the same results as the black curves of Figure
\ref{fig:comparison}, but for each subject.

\begin{figure*}[!ht]
  \centering
    \begin{tabular}{cc}
      \includegraphics[width=0.45\textwidth]{figs/subjects_acc.eps} &
      \includegraphics[width=0.45\textwidth]{figs/subjects_size.eps} \\
      $(a)$ & $(b)$
    \end{tabular}
    \caption{Accuracy $(a)$ and size $(b)$ of the models for each single subject,
    using the gaze.}
    \label{fig:subjects}
\end{figure*}

Consider the Figure, pane $(a)$: it is apparent that the worst subject
is number $5$, a 73-years old woman who has undergone in
the past a cataract surgical operation. It is not surprising that this
is the hardest subject; still, for $T_c=2$, the model has a remarkable
accuracy of $93.03\%$. All other subjects reach an accuracy of
$96.75\%$ and more for the same value of $T_c$. Analogous
considerations apply as far as the model size is concerned (pane $(b)$
of the same Figure). It is interesting to note that, even for such a
hard subject as subject $5$, the use of the gaze signal greatly
improves the accuracy of the model (see Figure \ref{fig:mama}).

\begin{figure}[!ht]
  \centering
    \includegraphics[width=\linewidth]{figs/mama.eps}
    \caption{Comparison between not using the gaze (red curve) and
    using the gaze (black one) as $T_c$ increases, for subject $5$.}
    \label{fig:mama}
\end{figure}

\subsection{Cross-subject analysis}

One further interesting point is: how well can these models be
transferred across subjects? In other words: are models trained on a
certain subject $i$ good for predicting the intention of another
subject $j$? Does gaze improve the situation? And, what are the
``hardest'' subjects to be modelled? In order to answer these
questions we have tested each model for $T_c=2$ on data gathered from
all subjects, both when using and not using the gaze. Figure
\ref{fig:cross} shows the results as cross-accuracy matrices: in each
matrix $A$, the entry $A_{ij}$ represents in colour the accuracy
attained by the model trained on subject $i$ when tested on data
gathered from subject $j$.

\begin{figure*}[!ht]
  \centering
    \begin{tabular}{cc}
      \includegraphics[width=0.45\textwidth]{figs/cross_nogaze.eps} &
      \includegraphics[width=0.45\textwidth]{figs/cross_gaze.eps} \\
    \end{tabular}
    \caption{Cross-subject accuracy, not using the gaze (left pane)
    and using the gaze (right pane).}
    \label{fig:cross}
\end{figure*}

As is apparent, using the gaze improves the situation: the overall
accuracy (not considering the diagonal elements of the matrices, of
course) is $55.97\% \pm 8.6\%$ when not using the gaze, as opposed to
$61.32\% \pm 11.77\%$ when using the gaze. In general these figures
are not very good, meaning that there is little chance that models can
be transferred across subjects, even when using the gaze.

Let us now restrict to the experiment with the gaze (right pane of the
Figure). The worst model (row of the matrix) is, unsurprisingly,
obtained from subject number $5$, with an accuracy of $49.31\% \pm
2.8\%$; as well, the hardest subject (column of the matrix) is again
number $5$, with an accuracy of $56.70\% \pm 9.09\%$. Subject $5$ has
to be treated on her own. But as well, again, let us remark that the
two best models, obtained from subjects $2$ ($73.99\% \pm 7.89\%$) and
$6$ ($70.32\% \pm 6.61\%$) still show a poor trasnferability as well
--- compare these figures with those of the previous Subsection.
