
%%\clearpage \newpage

\input{section-poking}

%%\clearpage \newpage



\section{Segmentation on a wearable}

Cite research abstract \citep{kemp02humans}.

Wearable computing systems have the potential to measure a great deal
of the sensory input and physical output of a person as he or she
experiences everyday activities. Much can be learned through passive
observation of these measurements. However, if we can also find ways
for the wearable system to control the behavior of the person wearing
the system, many learning tasks can be made easier.

We are designing a wearable creature that exploits a cooperative human
for its own learning purposes. Essentially, the human wearing the
system becomes the host for a parasitic creature that wishes to learn
about the world by watching and sometimes controlling the more
experienced host as he or she goes through common human activities in
the day. By using the same sensory input as the host and co-opting the
output behaviors of the host, the wearable creature serves as a top
layer of control in a subsumption architecture In essence, by
controlling the human in an effort to learn the wearable creature
changes the human into a humanoid robot.

As an initial exploration into this class of wearable applications, we
are creating a wearable system that attempts to learn common-sense
about everyday actions as they relate to objects and changes to the
environment. As shown in the figure at the top of the page, the system
currently consists of a glasses-mounted camera from which the creature
watches the world and 3 Intersense devices, each of which provides an
absolute orientation, with which the creature measures the kinematic
configuration of the host's dominant arm. The creature will also serve
as a high level controller that attempts to co-opt the host's
behaviors by requesting actions through headphones. For example, the
creature might request that its host repeat an action by uttering,
``do that again!'', which with a cooperative host should help the
creature segment the activity into meaningful parts. Likewise the
creature might ask to see an object of interest better, thereby
influencing the person to inspect the object more closely. More
generally, by requesting actions the wearable creature can test
hypotheses it has made about actions and their effect in the world.

We hope to develop a viable system for the acquisition of commonsense
related to everyday human activities. A successful creature would be
able to learn and control a set of common behaviors performed by a
cooperative human and would be able to relate common action patterns
to the visual appearance of objects and to observed changes in the
world.

\begin{figure}[bt]
\includegraphics[width=\columnwidth]{cckemp02_2}
\caption
{
cckemp 1
}
\label{fig:cckemp1}
\end{figure}


%%\clearpage \newpage

\section{Segmentation through periodicity}

Cite research abstract~\citep{arsenio02boosting}.

\subsection{Waving the object}

\subsection{Waving the hand/arm/finger}

Through direct embodied actuation

  Teacher waves objects to the robot

Human arm/hand/finger waving for segmentation

Robust: to humans, other objects moving in the background --
ignored if they are non-periodic

Powerful technique for segmenting stationary objects e.g. Objects
painted in a book

Heavy, stationary objects: table, sofa

Using relative size of the arm, can get relative size of objects

Through indirect embodied actuation

 Teacher waves arm/hand/finger to create a pop-out effect
       finger trajectory groups segmented regions together

Method:

1)  Detect Motion > Th

     Detect Skin tones for arm/hand/finger  > Th

2) Initialize grid of points in moving region

3) Track these points over the window interval (32 and 64 frames)

     - using optical flow

4) Compute WFFTs for the temporal signal of each point

5) Select signals with a single peak of energy over all frequencies 


\begin{figure}[bt]
\includegraphics[width=\columnwidth]{fig-artur1}
\caption
{
artur 1
}
\label{fig:artur1}
\end{figure}

%%\newpage

\begin{figure}[bt]
\includegraphics[width=\columnwidth]{fig-artur2}
\caption
{
artur 2
}
\label{fig:artur2}
\end{figure}


%%\clearpage \newpage
