The most interesting part of our research was how to predict the
amount of force applied by the subject by looking at the EMG
signal. To do this, we have repeated once again the analysis done in
Subsection \ref{subsec:strategy} for the three approaches selected,
and found out that the four sessions involved in the best models were:
$6,12,3,12$ for SVMs, $4,11,3,12$ for NNs and $6,13,3,4$ for LWPR.

For regression, we have considered three indicators of performance:

\begin{enumerate}

  \item the Mean Squared Error (MSE) in its standard definition;

  \item the Normalised Root MSE (NRMSE), ratio of the square root of
    the MSE and the range of the target values, expressed as a
    percentage; and

  \item the Squared Correlation Coefficient (SCC) between the
    predicted target and the real target.

\end{enumerate}

\begin{figure*}[!ht] \centering
  \begin{tabular}{cc}
    \includegraphics[width=0.45\textwidth]{figs/fig_err_regr_resCrossBestOnDay1} &
    \includegraphics[width=0.45\textwidth]{figs/fig_err_regr_resCrossBestOnDay2} \\
     SVM: $11.84\% \pm 2.64\%$ &  SVM: $10.54\% \pm 3.18\%$ \\
      NN: $10.54\% \pm 1.41\%$ &   NN: $10.01\% \pm 1.93\%$ \\
    LWPR: $11.98\% \pm 1.31\%$ & LWPR: $11.13\% \pm 1.32\%$ \\
    \includegraphics[width=0.45\textwidth]{figs/fig_MSE_regr_resCrossBestOnDay1} &
    \includegraphics[width=0.45\textwidth]{figs/fig_MSE_regr_resCrossBestOnDay2} \\
     SVM: $7.86 \pm 3.35$ &  SVM: $5.44 \pm 2.79$ \\
      NN: $6.27 \pm 2.36$ &   NN: $4.76 \pm 1.52$ \\
    LWPR: $7.79 \pm 1.83$ & LWPR: $6.03 \pm 2.07$ \\
    \includegraphics[width=0.45\textwidth]{figs/fig_SCC_regr_resCrossBestOnDay1} &
    \includegraphics[width=0.45\textwidth]{figs/fig_SCC_regr_resCrossBestOnDay2} \\
     SVM: $0.77 \pm 0.09$ &  SVM: $0.78 \pm 0.11$ \\
      NN: $0.83 \pm 0.04$ &   NN: $0.83 \pm 0.04$ \\
    LWPR: $0.78 \pm 0.05$ & LWPR: $0.77 \pm 0.04$ \\
  \end{tabular}
  \caption{Regression accuracy of best models, day $1$ (left panes)
    and day $2$ (right panes). First row: Mean Squared Error; second
    row: Normalised Root MSE; third row, Squared Correlation Coefficient.}
  \label{fig:best_regr}
\end{figure*}

Figure \ref{fig:best_regr} shows the results; left panes are for day
$1$ and right panes for day $2$. Consider the first row, plotting the
NRMSE for each session: as it is apparent, as it was for
classification, there is no clear advantage of one approach over
another. NNs perform slightly better as far as the NRMSE is concerned,
which is probably the most interesting measure of performance, when
moving to a real setting. Their overall accuracy is on average
$10.54\% \pm 1.41\%$ and $10.01\% \pm 1.93\%$. But as well, both LWPR
and SVM perform quite well, their average errors being from $10.54\%$
to $11.98\%$.

Consider now the second and third rows of the Figure. First of all it
is there is a clear inverse correlation between the MSE and the SCC,
as it is expected: for both days and for all approaches, a larger MSE
corresponds to a lower SCC. Secondly, it is once again clear that the
generalisation performance strongly depends on which data we have used
to train the machines: consider for instance the MSE attained by SVM
on day $1$ (Figure \ref{fig:best_regr}, second row, left pane, blue
curve): the best model was trained upon data coming from sessions $6$
and $12$, although uniformised, and not surprisingly those are the
sessions for which the MSE is minimum; the same effect is present for
the other approaches.

Lastly, in practical terms: the best average MSE obtained by NNs
($6.27\cdot 10^4 \pm 2.36\cdot 10^4$ and $4.76\cdot 10^4 \pm 1.52\cdot
10^4$) corresponds to, in turn, an average error of $5N$ and
$4.36N$. Figure \ref{fig:regression} shows some samples of the force
values obtained from the OFTS, along with the corresponding values
predicted by the best approach, that is, NNs. As one can see, despite
the non perfect correspondence of the two curves, the NN definitely
follows the real target to a remarkable degree of accuracy, for a wide
range of frequencies of the pressing/releasing action. The Figure
shows data taken from three different sessions, in decreasing order of
performance.

\begin{figure*}[!ht] \centering
  \begin{tabular}{ccc}
    \includegraphics[width=0.30\textwidth]{figs/fig_regression1} &
    \includegraphics[width=0.30\textwidth]{figs/fig_regression2} &
    \includegraphics[width=0.30\textwidth]{figs/fig_regression3} \\
    session $6$, day $1$ & session $10$, day $2$ & session $7$, day $1$ \\
    MSE: $4.85\cdot 10^4$ & MSE: $5.48\cdot 10^4$ & MSE: $10.21\cdot 10^4$ \\
  \end{tabular}
  \caption{Examples of the force target value, as guessed by our
    Neural Network.}
  \label{fig:regression}
\end{figure*}

A remarkable point in the Figure is the presence of a ``plateau''
effect, especially in the test with the worst performance, namely
session $7$ of day $1$ (third pane). As is apparent, the predicted
target are mostly wrong in amplitude, being systematically
\emph{lower} than the correct values. Again, this is most likely due
to insufficient sampling in the region of interest.
