Our experimental results, performed on a large data set of about
$153000$ samples, clearly show that the Online Uniformisation
procedure can be used to obtain dramatically smaller training sets
with no \emph{qualitative} loss of information; in other words, as
more of the input space is sampled, OU keeps the training set
up-to-date and small. OU sets will result in small (and therefore,
fast) and accurate models of the sought-for EMG-to-hand
map. Remarkably, OU works fine for both grasp classification and force
regression, and with all three different machine learning approaches
tested. Moreover, it is extremely simple, being nothing more than an
online check of Euclidean distance in the input space. This check is
done so far by considering the new sample's distance from all samples
in the current training set, and therefore could become unfeasibly
heavy as the set grows; but the same check can be clearly done in
constant time using an algorithmic optimisation, such a hash table.

Moreover, OU will produce models which perform \emph{uniformly} well,
enabling a patient to drive the prosthesis with a good accuracy in
\emph{all} situations that might arise, no matter how frequently they
appear during the training phase.

The choice of the minimum inter-sample distance $d$ is obviously
crucial and depends on the required accuracy in classification and/or
regression; but as we have seen, as $d$ is increased, the machine's
performance degrades only linearly, whereas the training sets become
polynomially smaller. Therefore, at the proce of having a slightly
worse performance, dramatically smaller training sets can be used.

We believe this is the first step toward the real application of
machine learning to an EMG-driven adaptive, dexterous hand
prosthesis. Let us consider the problems outlined in Subsection
\ref{subsubsec:electrodes}: in this paper we have solved problems
$3$ and $4$. Now, since OU lets us obtain good accuracy with extremely
small training sets, it is not too far-fetched to say that the
solution of problem $2$ is at hand --- in principle, the changing arm
posture can be taken into account simply by sampling more of the input
space. As far as problem $1$ is concerned, inter-subject usability is
really of lesser interest, since one patient only is supposed to ever
wear a prosthesis. On the other hand, a futher problem is that of
training the system upon an amputee. First of all, the patient must
still have a good deal of muscular and nervous plasticity in her arm
stump; then, a smart way of collecting training data must be
devised --- an amputee is obviously not expected to train the machine
with a hand. A simple idea is that of gathering EMG data from the
patient's stump and grasping/force data from her healthy hand, while
instructing her to imagine doing the same actions with both hands.

As far as force regression is concerned, the results presented above
are, to the best of our knowledge, totally novel. Surprinsingly,
regression from the forearm surcafe EMG signal to the force applied by
the hand had never been attempted before. Given the good performance
obtained by our models, we claim that the relationship between the EMG
signal and the force has been captured by the models, under variable
conditions of muscle fatigue (within one session) and electrode
displacement (within sessions belonging to different groups).

All in all, in this paper we have presented a machine learning
approach to joint classification of grasping and regression on the
applied force, using forearm surface electromyography. The approach is
totally non-invasive, easy to set up and use and it can be applied
from scratch with no previous knowledge of the problem. The Online
Uniformisation procedure can be used to incrementally build a training
set which will result in small and accurate models of the problem.

Our experiments, carried out using a Support Vector Machine with
Gaussian kernel, a Neural Network with sigmoidal activation function
and Locally Weighted Projection Regression, indicate that the approach
achieves, using a training set of about $1800$ samples on a total of
$153000$ (for $d=0.21$), an average accuracy of around $90\%$ in
classification of grasp types and a normalised root MSE of $7.89\%$ in
prediciton of the force applied during the grasp. Of the tested
approaches, SVM is marginally better than the others, especially when
larger training sets are used. The OU procedure is able to find as
small a training set as $77.4$ samples on average (out of $153000$),
which will still result in a SVM having a remarkable NRMSE of
$12.12\%$.
